Genetic variance and Ecological Niche Models (gENM)
=====================================================

Global atmospheric temperatures are currently following the worst case
scenarios for climate projections. Studies of climate change impacts
on ecosystems often use Species Distribution Models (SDM) to predict
how altered climatic regimes will shift species' ranges; however,
processes, such as local adaptation, are known to generate variation
within species Parmesan (2006) that could have community level impacts
(Ikeda et al.  2014; Record et al. 2013), which current SDMs employ
species level data, which have historically averaged over this
important intraspecific variation (Aitken and Bemmels 2016; Gotelli
and Stanton-Geddes 2015; Fitzpatrick and Keller 2014). In this
project, a collaborative team of researchers will use two study
systems, the carnivorous plant *Sarracenia purpurea* (the Northern
Pitcher Plant) and Eastern North American ant assemblages, to: 

1. collect and process field samples for genetic analyses 
2. test the sensitivity of SDM to intraspecific genetic variation
through computer simulations
3. improve the transparency of SDM modeling through the application
and development of data provenance software (Boose et al. 2007).

The students selected for this project will be co-mentored by Matthew
Lau and Sydne Record. At the beginning of the project, mentors will have
daily meetings advising individual projects for the first two weeks.
Thereafter, we will have weekly group meetings. Matthew Lau will be
based out of HF for the summer. Sydne Record will be based at HF and
Bryn Mawr College for the summer. Sydne will Skype with the student 2-3
times per week when she is not physically at HF or in the field with the
student.

Details on specific student components of the group project are as
follows:

Collecting and processing field samples for genetic analyses: Sydne
Record will be the primary mentor for this student. The student will
learn field sampling methods, plant identification skills, and how to
perform DNA extractions for field collected samples. The student will
also begin to learn about species distribution modeling and how it would
be extended to incorporate the data they collect on pitcher plant
genetic variation. General requirements for this position include: being
willing to participate in field activities sometimes for long hours,
having a valid driver’s license and clean driving record, being able to
hike with a 45-lb pack in rough forested or wetland terrain with
standing water several feet deep, being willing to handle contents of
pitcher plants (including spiders, ants, etc.), being willing to collect
leaf tissue from pitcher plants, spending time in the laboratory
processing genetics samples and handling chemicals, being able to spend
many hours in the lab analyzing data, have or be willing to develop a
basic understanding of Excel and R for graphical statistical analysis,
be willing to collaborate and work with other members of the pitcher
plant genomic distribution modeling team that extends beyond researchers
at HF, and being willing to travel overnight for field excursions. On
average the student can expect to spend about 50% of the time doing
field work and 50% of the time doing lab work and data analysis. This
student will be offsight for field excursions for 1-2 weeks and may
spend 1 week at University of Vermont processing genetic samples in Dr.
Stephen Keller’s laboratory. There will be opportunities for the student
to develop an independent project that can be extended into a year-long
independent project or senior thesis work.

Species distribution modeling: Matthew Lau will be the primary mentor
for this student. This student’s main project would be to conduct
simulations including genetic variation in SDMs for ants. Additionally,
the student could explore the effects of how intraspecific variation is
distributed spatially or temporally or conduct simulations with other
species. This student will learn about SDMs and refine skills using R
statistical software and GIS. The student may also learn about working
on remote servers using BASH. General requirements for the project
include: having experience using R statistical software and GIS, being
willing to spend many hours working at a computer, and have or be
willing to learn how to work remotely on servers using BASH. On average
the student can expect to spend most of their time inside doing data
analysis, but will have opportunities to accompany the field based
student or students working on other field projects in the field.

Data provenance: Matthew Lau will be the primary mentor for this
student. This student’s main project would be to apply the data
provenance software ‘RData tracker’ to the SDM project and to the field
samples, which will need to be spatially referenced. Further work could
be done in developing specific software functions and data pipelines to
improve data provenance software. This student will learn about data
provenance and refine skills using R statistical software. General
requirements for the project include: having experience using R
statistical software and being willing to spend many hours working at a
computer. On average the student can expect to spend most of their time
inside doing data analysis, but will have opportunities to accompany the
field based student or students working on other field projects in the
field.

Useful Links:

Species distribution modeling 101:
<http://rcastilho.pt/SDM101/SDM_files/SDM101_v1.pdf>

References:

Aitken, Sally N, and Jordan B Bemmels. 2016. “Time to get moving:
assisted gene flow of forest trees.” *Evolutionary Applications* 9 (1):
271–90. doi:[10.1111/eva.12293](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/eva.12293).

Boose, Emery R., Aaron M. Ellison, Leon J. Osterweil, Lori a. Clarke,
Rodion Podorozhny, Julian L. Hadley, Alexander Wise, and David R.
Foster. 2007. “Ensuring reliable datasets for environmental models and
forecasts.” *Ecological Informatics* 2: 237–47.
doi:[10.1016/j.ecoinf.2007.07.006](http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2007.07.006).

Fitzpatrick, Matthew C., and Stephen R. Keller. 2014. “Ecological
genomics meets community-level modelling of biodiversity: mapping the
genomic landscape of current and future environmental adaptation.”
Edited by Mark Vellend. *Ecology Letters* 18 (1): n/a–/a.
doi:[10.1111/ele.12376](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/ele.12376).

Gotelli, Nicholas J., and John Stanton-Geddes. 2015. “Climate change,
genetic markers and species distribution modelling.” *Journal of
Biogeography* 42 (9): 1577–85.
doi:[10.1111/jbi.12562](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/jbi.12562).

Ikeda, Dana H., Helen M. Bothwell, Matthew K. Lau, Gregory A. O’Neill,
Kevin C. Grady, and Thomas G. Whitham. 2014. “A genetics-based Universal
Community Transfer Function for predicting the impacts of climate change
on future communities.” Edited by Joseph Bailey. *Functional Ecology* 28
(1): 65–74.
doi:[10.1111/1365-2435.12151](http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1365-2435.12151).

Parmesan, Camille. 2006. “Ecological and Evolutionary Responses to
Recent Climate Change.” *Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics* 37 (1): 637–69.
doi:[10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.37.091305.110100](http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.37.091305.110100).

Record, S., N. D. Charney, R. M. Zakaria, and A. M. Ellison. 2013.
“Projecting global mangrove species and community distributions under
climate change.” *Ecosphere* 4 (3): art34.
doi:[10.1890/ES12-00296.1](http://dx.doi.org/10.1890/ES12-00296.1).


[![Stories in Ready](https://badge.waffle.io/HarvardForest/gENM.svg?label=1%20R-%20Ready&title=1%20-%20Ready)](http://waffle.io/HarvardForest/gENM)
