---
title: "Genetic variance and Ecological Niche Models (GV-ENM)"
output: md_document
bibliography: gv-enm.bib

---

# Genetic variance and Ecological Niche Models (GV-ENM)

Global atmospheric temperatures are currently following the worst case
scenarios for climate projections. Studies of climate change impacts
on ecosystems often use Species Distribution Models (SDM) to predict
how altered climatic regimes will shift species' ranges; however,
processes, such as local adaptation, are known to generate variation
within species @Parmesan2006 that could have community level impacts
[@Ikeda2014; @Record2013], which current SDMs employ species level
data, which have historically averaged over this important
intraspecific variation [@Aitken2016; @Gotelli2015; @Fitzpatrick2014]. In this
project, a collaborative team of researchers will use two study
systems, the carnivorous plant *Sarracenia purpurea* (the Northern
Pitcher Plant) and Eastern North American ant assemblages, to:  1)
collect and process field samples for genetic analyses; 2) test the
sensitivity of SDM to intraspecific genetic variation through computer
simulations; and 3) improve the transparency of SDM modeling through
the application and development of data provenance software
[@Boose2007].

The students selected for this project will be co-mentored by Matthew
Lau and Sydne Record. At the beginning of the project, mentors will
have daily meetings advising individual projects for the first two
weeks. Thereafter, we will have weekly group meetings. Matthew Lau
will be based out of HF for the summer. Sydne Record will be based at
HF and Bryn Mawr College for the summer. Sydne will Skype with the
student 2-3 times per week when she is not physically at HF or in the
field with the student.

Details on specific student components of the group project are as
follows:

Collecting and processing field samples for genetic analyses: Sydne
Record will be the primary mentor for this student. The student will
learn field sampling methods, plant identification skills, and how to
perform DNA extractions for field collected samples. The student will
also begin to learn about species distribution modeling and how it
would be extended to incorporate the data they collect on pitcher
plant genetic variation. General requirements for this position
include: being willing to participate in field activities sometimes
for long hours, having a valid driver’s license and clean driving
record, being able to hike with a 45-lb pack in rough forested or
wetland terrain with standing water several feet deep, being willing
to handle contents of pitcher plants (including spiders, ants, etc.),
being willing to collect leaf tissue from pitcher plants, spending
time in the laboratory processing genetics samples and handling
chemicals, being able to spend many hours in the lab analyzing data,
have or be willing to develop a basic understanding of Excel and R for
graphical statistical analysis, be willing to collaborate and work
with other members of the pitcher plant genomic distribution modeling
team that extends beyond researchers at HF, and being willing to
travel overnight for field excursions. On average the student can
expect to spend about 50% of the time doing field work and 50% of the
time doing lab work and data analysis. This student will be offsight
for field excursions for 1-2 weeks and may spend 1 week at University
of Vermont processing genetic samples in Dr. Stephen Keller’s
laboratory. There will be opportunities for the student to develop an
independent project that can be extended into a year-long independent
project or senior thesis work.

Species distribution modeling: Matthew Lau will be the primary mentor
for this student. This student’s main project would be to conduct
simulations including genetic variation in SDMs for
ants. Additionally, the student could explore the effects of how
intraspecific variation is distributed spatially or temporally or
conduct simulations with other species. This student will learn about
SDMs and refine skills using R statistical software and GIS. The
student may also learn about working on remote servers using
BASH. General requirements for the project include: having experience
using R statistical software and GIS, being willing to spend many
hours working at a computer, and have or be willing to learn how to
work remotely on servers using BASH. On average the student can expect
to spend most of their time inside doing data analysis, but will have
opportunities to accompany the field based student or students working
on other field projects in the field.

Data provenance: Matthew Lau will be the primary mentor for this
student. This student’s main project would be to apply the data
provenance software ‘RData tracker’ to the SDM project and to the
field samples, which will need to be spatially referenced. Further
work could be done in developing specific software functions and data
pipelines to improve data provenance software. This student will learn
about data provenance and refine skills using R statistical
software. General requirements for the project include: having
experience using R statistical software and being willing to spend
many hours working at a computer. On average the student can expect to
spend most of their time inside doing data analysis, but will have
opportunities to accompany the field based student or students working
on other field projects in the field.

Useful Links:

Species distribution modeling 101: http://rcastilho.pt/SDM101/SDM_files/SDM101_v1.pdf

References:


